This is a story about
how a historic dispute has become
part of a global power struggle.
All the trend lines are pointing
towards escalation
and would make de-escalation
extremely difficult if it came
to blows in the Taiwan Strait.
If you go a couple of hundred kilometres
off the south east coast of China,
you reach Taiwan, an island
that behaves as an independent state
but which is considered by Beijing
as part of China.
And this shows Taiwan's
air defence zone,
which Chinese military planes
have increasingly entered,
crossing an unofficial line
between mainland China and Taiwan.
These incursions have risen
through the year, as you can see,
and Taiwan says relations are worse
than for 40 years.
When asked if China might invade,
this was the Taiwanese reply.
After 2025, they will be fully prepared.
That's our assessment.
The US sees a threat too.
The Wall Street Journal reported:
To which this is
the Chinese response.
The Taiwan question is purely
China's internal affair.
We will not tolerate
any outside interference.
Taiwan finds itself between
the tectonic plates of world power
and people there well understand
the position they’re in.
We are a small island nation,
so we are like a bargaining chip in
negotiations between big countries.
For these reasons and more tensions
around Taiwan risk
disturbing the uneasy equilibrium
in the region and to understand
these current tensions we need
to go back to their roots in 1949.
That’s when China’s nationalist
government was
defeated by the communists
and fled to Taiwan.
By 1950, the island was
effectively independent.
70 years on,
Taiwan, while once a dictatorship, is
now a democracy with press freedom.
China meanwhile is
an oppressive single-party state.
Both have seen rapid economic growth,
and for its part Beijing says it will do
whatever's necessary
to get Taiwan back.
That’s relevant when we listen
to this from President Xi.
The Chinese people
will never allow foreign forces
to bully, oppress or enslave us.
Anyone who dares to try
will have their heads bashed.
This shift in tone can also be seen
with reference to Taiwan.
Here's a cartoon in the
state-owned Global Times newspaper
depicting a Chinese invasion.
Now, this may all just be
bombastic rhetoric.
But the context here is that Chinese
military power is growing rapidly.
This is one of
Beijing's regular military parades.
The Chinese say their growth in military
spending since 1990 looks like this
and they say they'll spend more
than any other country bar America
in the coming 12 months.
And China knows if it attacked
Taiwan, America is nearby.
We've seen the US and its allies carry
out exercises in the Philippine Sea
and there are US military bases
across the region.
Also, remember this from September?
The UK, US and Australia
signed a defence pact,
in large part to counter China.
And in the middle of this
lies the US policy
of 'strategic ambiguity' on Taiwan.
This means America has signalled
a willingness to defend Taiwan
but not said how.
What is never said is
whether the United States would
in fact come
to Taiwan’s defence militarily
and it’s that ambiguity which
has been maintained for many years,
that the whole delicate balance
rests on.
And you can argue this has worked.
Taiwan's a prosperous democracy,
there’s been no conflict with China.
So what’s changed now?
Why is China's leadership cranking up
the pressure?
Well the first reason may be
Taiwan’s president,
Tsai Ing-wen. She wants
Taiwan to be independent of China
and this pro-Beijing analyst argues
a message is being sent to her.
Taiwan’s progressive democratic party
is really calling for independence.
That is really very, very dangerous.
So, I think the mainland has
to warn them and stop that.
Huiyao Wang
also presents a second factor -
that China
is being unreasonably provoked.
It’s in response to so many aircraft
and different warships passing
through the Taiwan Strait
and also, American military airplane
has landed at Taiwan.
The third possible reason
for Chinese action comes from
retired US army General
Stanley McCrystal.
Perhaps China is doing this now
because it can.
It’s different than five,
or 10, or 20 years ago.
Because the Chinese military now has
enough credible power
to at least contest
with the United States
over the potential defence of Taiwan
and that’s a very different dynamic.
Beijing will be well aware
of this different dynamic.
Not least because of Hong Kong.
Last year China brought in
new laws there to change policing
and freedom of speech, and despite
Western condemnation the law stayed.
And that brings us back to Taiwan,
and whether China may feel
emboldened to act.
A prospect that was put to
the Biden adminstration by the BBC.
Do you think
China will invade Taiwan?
I am not going to make any predictions,
what I am going to say is this.
From the United States’ perspective
there are certain
fundamental obligations,
and one of them is no unilateral
changes to the status quo.
And this cuts to it.
Taiwan and the US
want the status quo.
China does not.
And so Taiwan’s status has become a
test of the limits of America’s power
and the possibilities of China's.